+++
date = 2012-11-12T08:24:37Z
title = "Barycentric Julian Dates in Python"

[extra]
wp_rel_permalink = "/2012/11/barycentric-julian-dates-in-python/"
wp_shortlink = "/?p=588"
+++

(I wrote some code to calculate BJDs in Python. Skip the next few paragraphs
if you don’t want any context.)  I’ve been working on a problem that involves
(somewhat) precise timing of astronomical events over the span of a year or
two. Doing this right can be tricky since we generally learn about events by
the light they give off, and this light can take varying amounts of time to
reach the Earth from its origin; most notably, our motion around the sun
changes the distance between us and sources by enough to affect the apparent
time of an event by several minutes.  Of course, astronomers have known about
this issue for a while, which is why we have [Barycentric Julian
Dates](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barycentric_Julian_Date) (BJDs). Times in
astronomy are usually reported as some kind of “[Julian
date](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julian_date),” which is just a large number
counting days since some reference value. ([This is a much subtler task than
you might think](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_standard).) When we report
a BJD, the apparent time of an event has been adjusted to be what it would be
as if it we were observing at the
[barycenter](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barycenter) of the Solar System,
which is the coordinate origin of all modern, precise astronomical positional
calculations. _If_ the source of the events is stationary with respect to the
barycenter, this gives us a steady clock with which to measure when each event
happened.  To time precisely, then, we need to be able to compute the BJD of
an event from its apparent time as measured at some telescope. Pulsar
astronomers need to do these calculations to _nanosecond_ precision, so there
must be some ridiculously detailed code out there somewhere, but Google
doesn’t bring up many options. [Jason Eastman](http://www.astronomy.ohio-
state.edu/~jdeast/) and collaborators at Ohio State University have a [great
resource](http://astroutils.astronomy.ohio-state.edu/time/) with
documentation, online calculators, and code. Their core seems to be based on a
routine called [BARYCEN](http://astro.uni-
tuebingen.de/software/idl/aitlib/astro/barycen.html) by [Eckart
Göhler](http://astro.uni-tuebingen.de/~goehler/). Both reference
[documentation](http://lheawww.gsfc.nasa.gov/Craig.Markwardt/bary/) and some
[helper code](http://www.physics.wisc.edu/~craigm/idl/) from Craig Markwardt.
Unfortunately, all of this code is written in IDL. Let us never forget that 1)
IDL is not free and 2) it is a lame, bad, unpleasant language. I generally do
things in Python instead. I haven’t been able to find any Python libraries for
BJD computations, so I [added support](https://github.com/pkgw/precastro/commi
t/4d8926366a7ee081afab79beeb527d1e352a4080) to my [library for precision
astronomy in Python](https://github.com/pkgw/precastro/).  Now, **both the
library and the BJD support are halfassed**. The library builds off of two
well-vetted libraries, [IAU SOFA](http://www.iausofa.org/) and [USNO
NOVAS](http://aa.usno.navy.mil/software/novas/novas_info.php), but itself is
not well-tested and only exposes a few routines I’ve needed — none of which
has, in fact, required precision beyond the most basic levels. The BJD
support, meanwhile, **only corrects for the Earth’s orbit**, and so is
accurate to only 0.1 second or so: that is, a hundred million times worse than
what pulsar astronomers need.  But it’s good enough for me! And if you want to
compute BJDs in Python, hopefully you can build off of
[precastro](https://github.com/pkgw/precastro/) rather than starting from
scratch. It should be _capable_ of extremely precise calculations even if
there may be some wrinkles to work out, and as always I’ve tried to make the
API as nice as possible.  ### Further References  These are basically copied
from the resources linked above; I haven’t read them myself. Standing on the
shoulders of giants and all that.  *   Eastman J, Siverd R, Gaudi BS. [2010
PASP 122 935](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2010PASP..122..935E). *   Fairhead
L, Bretagnon P. [1990 A&A 229
240](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1990A&A...229..240F) *   Fairhead L,
Bretagnon P, Lestrade J-F.
[1988AUS..128..419F](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1988IAUS..128..419F). *
Fukushima T. [1995 A&A 294
895](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1995A&A...294..895F). *   Irwin AW,
Fukushima T. [1999 A&A 348
642](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1999A&A...348..642I). *   Petit G, Luzum B,
eds. IERS Conventions (2010), [IERS Technical Note #36](http://www.iers.org/nn
_11216/IERS/EN/Publications/TechnicalNotes/tn36.html). *   Standish, E. [1998
A&A 336 381](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1998A&A...336..381S). *   [_Tempo_
pulsar timing software](http://www.atnf.csiro.au/people/pulsar/tempo/).
