+++
date = 2010-07-27T16:49:29Z
title = "Qual: Feasibility Conclusions"

[extra]
wp_rel_permalink = "/2010/07/qual-feasibility-conclusions/"
wp_shortlink = "/?p=287"
+++

Based on the legwork I’ve done, what arguments can we make about the
feasibility of my thesis and how should I modify my plans to make them more
realistic?  ### Emphasize gamma rays in Cyg X-3 work  Even though I keep on
getting emails about X-ray observations of Cyg X-3 I shouldn’t lose sight of
the fact that the key novelty for our Cyg X-3 work is the recent detection of
it in gamma rays by AGILE and Fermi ([Tavani+
2009](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2009Natur.462..620T), [Fermi LAT
Collaboration 2009](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2009Sci...326.1512F)). We’ll
have near-continuous monitoring of X-3 from Fermi’s all-sky mapping
activities, though I need to get a better handle on what that dataset will
look like. I also need to think about what kind of radio/gamma variability
correlations we might find. Geoff suggests that previous work on blazars
should provide a good starting point — say, things building on [Maraschi+
1992](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1992ApJ...397L...5M). For instance, the
Fermi team was only able to constrain the delay between radio/gamma emission
peaks as 5 +- 7 days — can we do better?  ### Emphasize gal90 as part of AGCTS
We’re collecting data for the Cyg X-3 project in exactly the same way as we
are for the AGCTS and we should make sure to emphasize that these data can be
used for transient searching as well. The gal90 project data add to the AGCTS
dataset:  *   5 pointings (including Kepler field) *   164 scans at 3.14 GHz *
66 hours of data *   Mean duration of 0.40 hr *   Median duration of 0.325 hr
Which is nothing to sneeze at.  ### Explore Metrics for AGCTS  From my
attempts to compare the AGCTS and other existing surveys, and my attempts to
apply existing measurements of transient rates to the expected AGCTS dataset,
it’s become pretty clear that the transient parameter space is too large to
allow one or two simple, definitive comparisons. I need to think about a few
metrics for transient searches and rates that will demonstrate most clearly
the way in which AGCTS is different than existing surveys and in which
existing transient rate measurements apply (or fail to apply) to the AGCTS
dataset.  The context for this point is that I had failed to appreciate how
severely the move to higher frequencies affected the survey speed of the
AGCTS. From my initial computations, I had expected it to work out to be
clearly superior to the Hyman+ survey; now it’s pretty much inferior. Because
of the different chunk of parameter space that we’re carving out, I think we
still have interesting things to say about radio transients, but that
perspective is definitely a shift in how I think about the AGCTS project.  ###
Reference Posts  There are a few smaller topics that I should write reference
posts on:  *   Characteristics of relevant radio transient surveys in the
literature *   Transient rate measurements in the literature *   Summary of
blazar gamma/radio correlation research and its potential applicability to Cyg
X-3.
