+++
date = 2011-01-25T03:22:08Z
title = "How to Run a Research Group"

[extra]
wp_rel_permalink = "/2011/01/how-to-run-a-research-group/"
wp_shortlink = "/?p=385"
+++

**First point:** I don’t know how to run a research group, and I have no
experience in doing so.  **Second point:** That being said, something that I
read recently has been making me think about this particular topic. I found it
on the blog of [Matt Might](http://matt.might.net/), a CS professor at Utah
who had 15 seconds of webfame for “[The Illustrated Guide to a
Ph.D.](http://matt.might.net/articles/phd-school-in-pictures/)” In an list of
[academic productivity tips](http://matt.might.net/articles/productivity-tips-
hints-hacks-tricks-for-grad-students-academics/), he mentions  > Running a
research group is a lot like running as small business. Make it real by
branding your research group: give it a name. (Like [U
Combinator](http://www.ucombinator.org/)! \[His group. — PKGW\]) If you’re
working a project, give the project a product name or a code name.  What got
my attention wasn’t the particular “give it a name” idea or “small business”
analogy, but the broader point. A research group is an _organization_. Not a
big one, but one nonetheless. I generally hate it when people do the
following, but it seems helpful here: let’s look up a definition of
“organization”! [Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Organization):  > An
**organization** … is a social arrangement which pursues collective goals,
controls its own performance, and has a boundary separating it from its
environment.  The academic research groups with which I’m familiar tend not to
be so good at the “boundary” part — they generally don’t work very hard at
establishing an organizational identity. (Obviously, I’m most familiar with my
adviser’s group, but it’s not the only one I have in mind. I don’t know much
about groups outside of astronomy.) I think this is too bad: from what I’ve
seen, people are a lot more enthusiastic about their work when they feel like
they’re part of a team and that everyone’s pulling in the same direction. It
also makes a big difference when everyone knows what their “collective goals”
are. (Even if, I would say, they don’t necessarily agree with all of them.)
The other thing that I notice is that research groups tend not to have a lot
of the infrastructure that one associates with organizations. No, you don’t
need to write up an org chart for a group of seven people, but some things
genuinely are helpful — particularly, I’d say, communications tools. I get the
impression that many groups don’t even set up a shared email list, which
amazes me given that in the year 2011 doing so is [utterly
trivial](http://groups.google.com/). Besides being practical, shared spaces
like these help build up that sense of organizational identity.  Lately I’ve
been thinking about how I’d try to do things if I was in charge. A standalone
domain name and a website with a prominent list of members are, I think,
mandatory. So’s an email list. A table of group publications seems natural.
This may be a sickeningly corporate way to put it, but end-of-semester parties
would be a good way to celebrate everyone’s accomplishments over the past six
months. And speaking of sickeningly corporate, I even think it’d be great for
groups to come up with mission statements and have lists of core values.  > We
do great science by: >  > *   Choosing the right problem > *   Using (or
building) the right tool for the job > *   Keeping things specific, and > *
Knowing when to say “good enough”.  Doesn’t that make you want to go out and
do some kickass research right now?  As I mentioned at the top of this post, I
don’t actually have any practical experience in this area, so maybe I should
pay more attention to the fact that I don’t see many of these ideas being
implemented in practice. But astronomy does tend to do things differently —
I’d be curious about what happens in other disciplines.
