+++
date = 2007-12-06T22:42:00Z
title = "Sprint to the Finish"
path = "2007/12/sprint-to-the-finish"

[extra]
wp_rel_permalink = "/2007/12/sprint-to-the-finish/"
wp_shortlink = "/?p=49"
+++

Oops. Been a somewhat busy few days but haven’t been updating this. Let’s see
… Monday was more autoflagging work interspersed with some more pie-in-the-sky
OmegaPlot stuff. Got a fun little algorithm to quickly search for certain
kinds of RFI going in the former, and revamped the data model to handle some
ugly situations that sadly need to be handled in the latter.

Tuesday was the day before the AAS abstract deadline and I finally talked with
Geoff again and we decided that I’d be going for sure. So a bit of scrambling
to figure out what, exactly, I would make a poster about, and to write up its
abstract. It will be about the broadband spectra stuff, and we have a fairly
clear idea of what I’d like to accomplish. I have almost exactly one month to
finish things. I think it’s possible accomplish what I want in that timespan,
and I’m hopeful that there won’t even be a super time crunch involved if I
stay focused and chip away at things when I’m home for the holidays.

Tuesday was also the last class for optical lab. Nothing too exciting happened
in particular, but it was fun to hang out with the students one last time. A
few reasonable complaints about some aspects of the course but overall a lot
of the kids seemed to have had a really good time. I’m actually looking
forward a lot to receiving my GSI evaluations for that class. I think I did a
pretty good job, and while I fantasize about not getting any serious
complaints, I’d like to think that I’ll take to heart any criticisms that I do
get. I felt like I was much more in my element teaching this class than
Astro 10, so I’m curious to see how the students felt. Again, honestly, I felt
like I did a very, very good job, but I hope I’m big enough to not be
disappointed if the students weren’t quite that enthusiastic.

Wednesday was preparing to obtain the data for my AAS poster. Planning out the
observations, writing an observing script, making sure that everything was
ready to go. I think, after my experience with the previous data, I have the
observing plan down pretty well by now. And with luck, just taking new data
will be helpful since the quality of the system is generally trending
positively these days.

Today was the last lecture for Star Formation, some procrastination (not a
good sign in light of my new AAS-related obligations…), the last
pre-colloquium tea setup (not sorry for that to end), the last colloquium of
the semester, a post-colloquium department meeting kind of broadly dealing
with faculty-student relations, and finally a rehearsal for the holiday play
tomorrow.

Star Formation was a very good class overall, I thought. I feel like it was
well-taught and that I learned a lot. Certainly not worrying about the final
at all, though the fact that it’s open- everything doesn’t hurt.

And finally right now I’m attempting to take my AAS observations.
Unfortunately, a lot of things are going wrong tonight: got started late due
to play rehearsal; five of the antennas are down with a mysterious drive
problem; it’s rainy up there; there were a few bugs in my revised observing
script; and I had problems getting the antennas to lock on to one of my
sources. Phew! The data from this night are going to more or less be a bust.
At least I was able to get in touch with the staff astronomer on site and it
turns out that he had problems with the down antennas too and wasn’t able to
fix them. I was going to need to take more data anyway, but it’s kind of
annoying that this night was so problematic. I should be able to schedule
another night of observations extremely soon though and with luck all of these
issues will have gone away the next time around.

Now that I’m about to have data in hand, I need to sit down and work out the
best way to flag it all. The automatic flagging stuff won’t be directly useful
here — it would be more effort to get that working beautifully than to just do
it all manually. But that work has given me a good set of tools to slice
through the data I acquire, and I think that with a little bit of thinking I
can work out a few key tools to help me quickly identify what needs to be
flagged and to apply those flags. It won’t be entirely automatic, but it’ll be
way faster than what I was doing before, and hopefully I can do it all on the
Hat Creek computers so I can improve the data before averaging it and
downloading it to Berkeley.

If that all is succesful, then I can actually sit down and figure out the best
way to analyze the data …
